---
title: "5 Things About Working in Management from an Engineer who was a Manager"
layout: post
comments: true
---

It is no secret to many that my last job was in management.  Management for a large non-profit organization no less.
Like many engineers I fell into the trap of thinking that the natural progression of things was to get into management.
There is a great series from Steven Cerri that I recommend called ["So you want to be a manager"]("http://www.stevencerri.com/free/articles/so-you-want-to-be-a-manager/").  Anyone considering management should definitely read his entire series.  These are my five biggest changes I've noticed since changing jobs from a 60-hour per week management job to a results based job telecommuting from home.

Management wasn't a complete and epic failure for me.  Hurdles to jump ran the gamut from interpersonal to cultural.
What I did not realize though was that moving into management was essentially changing careers.  It would have been just
as difficult in 2012 for me to consider becoming a CPA, Dentist, or auto mechanic because I would essentially be learning a new skill set.  Too often organizations will move the most technically proficient person into a managerial role due to longevity and the logical fallacy that just because an engineer is good at "X" they must also be good at supervising a team the does "X".  This is not always true because navigating people and politics is very different than engineering.  This leads me to observation number one since returning to technical work 100% of the time.

## Number One! Engineering Jobs have problems with right and wrong answers.  Management jobs do not.
As an engineer problems almost always have solutions.  When you're managing a group of people and there are often situations that have multiple right answers or everything is in fact the wrong answer.  Effective engineers are driven by success and the thrill of solving a problem this can often result in interpersonal conflict if the engineer becomes a manager.  Depending on political landscape there may be some very reasonable problems that can never be solved and to technically minded employees. This can be a deal breaker.

## Number Two! Some of your biggest problems will be other employees and their ability to do technical work.
Remember the trap stated earlier that just because an engineer is good at "X" they must be good at supervising other engineers that perform "X"?  This is an even more dangerous trap if now the newly promoted engineer is supervising less performant staff.  This is the person who was promoted based on performance so naturally they are going to have a very high standard for quality and hold others accountable to that same standard.  Can you imagine a company where they promoted from engineering groups based on mediocrity or technical deficiency?  Maybe we should!  Since companies often promote the most performant engineer they will be less inclined to understand the struggles of an employee with a lower aptitude or a smaller output per day.  While this might be good for cleaning house it can be damaging for morale.

## Number Three! It's easy to fall into the trap that you can "Do it all"
Every engineer who moves into a managerial role wants to have their cake and eat it to.  In other words they are suffering from the dillusion that you can remain technical, do technical work, and also become a superior manager.  This is the most dangerous trap to fall into.  Most engineers know from experience that they can adapt to any situation and find efficiencies in their workflow to increase output for a time.  We've all been faced with a deadline and put in 200% at the last minute to get something out the door.  As stated before though we're not just bringing on extra work for a little while.  Management is a new career.  No one is capable of doing three jobs at once.  Engineers will fall into the trap that if alter the variables enough eventually things will work out.  What they don't take into account in that equation is the people factor.  People are like a part of your equation that will continue to change variables and operators without telling you making the perfect balance of all things further and further away.

## Number Four! Engineers will Empathize with other Engineers
One of the things I consider a victory in my last management posting was always taking the best care of the important resources.  That was my team of engineers.  Having been an engineer I could identify with their struggles, anticipate stress, and understand why all the light went of their eyes when they had to work a night or weekend.  All of the worst parts of a job being highly accountable and being on call all the time were seared into my memory like so many grill marks on a chicken breast.  As I result I doggedly kept my team out of harms way ensuring they were treated like human beings, paid on call compensation, and expected to have a reasonable workload. For my trouble I developed a reputation for being lazy, padding project schedules, and being difficult to work with due to the fact that I protected my team.  The people I was responsible for was my first team and the company second.  A choice I don't regret but some would argue as a manager your first responsibility is to tow the company line.

## Number Five! Changing modes during the day takes more energy.
Moving from technically proficient engineer to schmoozing politician can really take it's toll on the human brain.  This may not be the same for everyone.  Personally though my MBTI falls right small in the middle between extrovert and introvert.  This makes it easy for me to swing up into the gregarious outgoing "mode" and the recede into the deeply introspective and creative corners of my mind.  Having of course fallen for the trap of "you can do it all" I was moving between modes in my old job 6 or 7 times a day dependent on the number of meetings scheduled.  Now that I'm working alone on technical work again I've noticed a major boost in productivity.  It takes less time to get into "work mode"  because I'm never coming back from a meeting, reception, or from practicing active listening with a tough customer.

Three years ago would I make the same choice again?  Probably.  The job was an interesting opportunity and taught me a lot about myself.  For now though I'll stick to being an engineer on the technical side.  

